Title: A conceptual framework for ideology beyond the left and right

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.18945v1

Published Time: Fri, 20 Mar 2026 01:14:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# A conceptual framework for ideology beyond the left and right 

## Kenneth Joseph 

## University at Buffalo Buffalo, NY, USA 

## kjoseph@buffalo.edu 

## Kim Williams 

## Portland State University Portland, OR, USA 

## kmw3@pdx.edu 

## David Lazer 

## Northeastern University Boston, MA, USA 

## d.lazer@northeastern.edu 

## Abstract 

NLP+CSS work has operationalized ideology almost exclusively on a left/right partisan axis. This approach obscures the fact that people hold interpretations of many different complex and more specific ideologies on issues like race, climate, and gender. We introduce a frame-work that understands ideology as an attributed, multi-level socio-cognitive concept network, and explains how ideology manifests in dis-course in relation to other relevant social pro-cesses like framing. We demonstrate how this framework can clarifies overlaps between exist-ing NLP tasks (e.g. stance detection and natu-ral language inference) and also how it reveals new research directions. Our work provides a unique and important bridge between computa-tional methods and ideology theory, enabling richer analysis of social discourse in a way that benefits both fields. 

## 1 Introduction 

I’m sick of seeing tweets putting all us white people into one box. It isn’t all of "us". Can’t fix racism with more racism. Are you part of the solution or the prob-lem? I believe Black Lives Matter. Ibelieve we can collectively make change. 

The murder of George Floyd in 2020 prompted an eruption of social media posts about race. Many of these resembled the tweets above. 1 Data from this period has been widely analyzed to under-stand discursive patterns across the left/right parti-san divide (Ziems and Yang, 2021; Shugars et al., 2021), as well as how discussion around specific is-sues evolved (Gallagher et al., 2018; Freelon et al., 2016; Roy and Goldwasser, 2023). However, both analyses—the one that reduces individuals to a position on a spectrum, and the one that studies 

> 1Modified to protect anonymity Observable
> Discourse
> (Discursive
> Behavior)
> Framing and
> Identity -driven
> Processes
> Values
> Attitudes
> Ideology 2
> Ideology 1
> Beliefs
> Ideologies as attributed
> multi -level (sub)networks
> Rationalizations

Figure 1: A visualization of our framework, showing ideologies and their relation to discourse in the con-text of framing and identity processes. Ideologies are socially shared, attributed, multi-level networks of val-ues, attitudes, beliefs, and rationalizations. Discursive elements (e.g. tweets or blog posts) reflect subsets of ideologies as understood by individual actors in a given socio-temporal context. 

attitudes in isolation—obscure the fact that these posts reflect a socially shared and structured way of understanding race specifically . That is, each example tweet alludes to one of many views em-bedded in a temporally stable and socially shared 

system of thought surrounding racial identity, the nature and/or existence of racism, and appropriate responses to inequality. These specific, structured, temporally stable, and socially shared systems of thought are known as 

ideologies (Freeden, 2021; Gerring, 1997). Ide-ologies shape how we interpret, rationalize, and act on social issues such as race, climate change (Yantseva, 2025), gender (Davis and Greenstein, 2009), and even language itself (Woolard, 2020). Discourse plays a central role in this process. Much of how ideologies are constructed, learned, and con-tested occurs through language in everyday inter-action and mass communication (Van Dijk, 2013). This suggests a natural role for NLP, and more directly NLP+CSS, 2 scholars in the study of ideol-

> 2NLP and computational social science
> arXiv:2603.18945v1 [cs.CY] 19 Mar 2026

ogy: if ideologies shape interpretation and behav-ior (Jost et al., 2009), and discourse is a primary site where ideologies are constructed and learned (Van Dijk, 1998), then NLP methods should be a critical tool in the study of ideology. Unsurprisingly, then, NLP+CSS scholars have long studied the problem of identifying left/right ideological leanings in text (Laver et al., 2003; Iyyer et al., 2014). More recent work has extended this paradigm by introducing multi-dimensional ideological spaces (Röttger et al., 2024; Sinno et al., 2022), categorical distinctions such as extrem-ist versus moderate positions (Paschalides et al., 2025; Preo¸ tiuc-Pietro et al., 2017), and alterna-tive axes (e.g., democratic versus authoritarian) (Piedrahita et al., 2025). But even these alternative dimensional representations are blunt instruments (Levine, 2024). Individuals hold (their own inter-pretations of) many different ideologies, and these emerge in discourse in ways that dimensional mod-els struggle to capture (Maynard and Mildenberger, 2018). For example, while the tweets above can be interpreted within a left/right framing of ideol-ogy, they are better understood in the context of ideologies centered on race . The first tweet reflects elements of a colorblind racial ideology (Bonilla-Silva, 2006), which broadly holds that the United States is a “post-racial” society. The second reflects an intersectional ideology, which understands iden-tity as multifaceted, that structural conditions are the primary cause of inequality, and that the mar-gins of society must be centered when advocating for social change (Collins and Bilge, 2020). As with all ideologies (Van Dijk, 2013), however, the precise scope and boundaries of colorblindness and intersectionality are contested and fluid (Hamil-ton et al., 2022; Pérez, 2017). Moreover, in the context of race (Doane, 2017; Mueller, 2020) and other social issues such as climate change (Lee et al., 2024), new ideologies can emerge, as can the discursive patterns used by adherents to ex-isting ideologies. Studying ideology beyond the left/right paradigm therefore faces a three-pronged challenge: (1) identifying which ideologies exist ,(2) identifying the contents of a particular ideol-ogy (in a given socio-temporal context), and (3) determining which discursive patterns represent ad-herence to which (parts of) which socially shared ideologies. Complicating this task further are on-going debates about what ideology even is (Ger-ring, 1997; Knight, 2006; Martin, 2015), and for NLP researchers, how ideologies are expressed in discourse alongside other communicative pro-cesses such as framing (Oliver and Johnston, 2000; Van Dijk, 2023). 

Identifying ideologies, their contents, and their discursive patterns is thus a critically im-portant but also methodologically challenging task. Of course, there is no need to start from scratch. Social theory provides foundations for modeling ideology conceptually —that is, in ways that go beyond spatial representations but that pro-vide some abstraction from raw discourse (e.g. sur-face forms) (Maynard and Mildenberger, 2018). However, empirical work in this vein is limited (Homer-Dixon et al., 2013) and challenging to ex-pand to new settings (Maynard, 2013; Van Dijk, 2013). In contrast, the NLP+CSS community is capable of replicable and scalable analyses using relevant methods, like (multi-faceted) stance detec-tion (Aldayel and Magdy, 2019; Liu et al., 2024) and (culturally-aware) natural language inference (Huang and Yang, 2023). However, NLP+CSS does not have the requisite theoretical clarity to specify how these tasks can help us study ideology, or what new tools are needed. The goal of this paper is to build this link be-tween the rich empirical landscape of NLP and the powerful but empirically under-studied models of ideology theorists. To do so, we first outline a framework, components of which are summa-rized in Figure 1, that 1) provides a succinct op-erationalization of ideology as an attributed multi-level network of socio-cognitive concepts, 2) ex-plains how ideology relates to other constructs that are widely studied in the NLP+CSS literature (e.g. framing), and 3) guides understanding of how ideol-ogy, identity, and framing combine to shape and be shaped by discourse. Our framework is informed by work in discourse studies (Van Dijk, 1998), ide-ology studies (Maynard and Mildenberger, 2018), political science (Gerring, 1997; Converse, 1964; Green, 2024), psychology (Jost et al., 2009; Zmi-grod, 2022) and sociology (Oliver and Johnston, 2000), but is novel in its synthesis of existing opera-tionalizations across these fields and in its practical utility for NLP researchers. We then use our frame-work to discuss the mutual benefits that linking the conceptual study of ideology and modern NLP methods can bring. Our primary contributions are: • We provide an actionable framework linking ideology theory to NLP+CSS research, en-abling new ways of computationally studying ideology in discourse • We outline new directions for detecting ide-ologies in humans and LLMs and measuring their downstream impacts • We provide a unifying lens showing how dis-parate NLP tasks (stance detection, framing, NLI) connect through ideology—and what new tasks are needed 

## 2 A Framework for Studying Ideology Conceptually in Discourse 

Almost all definitions of ideology 3 invoke what Gerring (1997) calls coherence , the idea that an ide-ology is a collection of concepts that a group of peo-ple believe “fit together.” Scholars also agree that ideologies are not only interpretive frameworks; they are used, consciously or subconsciously, to understand, motivate, and interpret behaviors and outcomes (Freeden, 2021; Van Dijk, 1998). There is thus wide agreement that ideologies are, at a minimum, shared and coherent worldviews that explain why “it is how it is” and “what should be done about it” (Oliver and Johnston, 2000). However, this common ground leaves a gap be-tween definition and operationalization. It does not specify, for example, what concepts we should be interested in, when some combination of concepts constitutes a coherent ideology, or how we should know when someone might “have” an ideology based on their discourse. Answers to these ques-tions vary in the literature. For example, most agree that ideologies minimally include coherent systems of beliefs (Converse, 1964; Van Dijk, 1998). How-ever, social identities are treated by some as com-ponents of ideology (Boutyline and Vaisey, 2017), and by others as a distinct analytical dimension (Orr et al., 2023). And while many assume ide-ologies can be modeled as a unimodal network, recent work challenges this assumption (Fishman and Davis, 2022). The framework we propose does not purport to provide a definitive answer to all such questions. However, what it does do effectively is to provide a starting point for studying ideology conceptually that is consistent with an interdisciplinary litera-ture and is legible to NLP researchers . We do so by answering four key questions: 1. Which concepts can be part of an ideology? 

> 3Table 2 in the appendix provides a few representative definitions of ideology, a more extensive set is constructed by Gerring (1997).

2. Which relationships between concepts should be considered? 3. Which criteria should be used to determine whether a set of concepts and their relations forms a coherent ideology? 4. When does(n’t) an actor’s discourse tell us they align with a particular ideology? 

2.1 Which concepts can be part of an ideology? 

Table 1 presents a set of concepts that are elements of ideologies, alongside three constructs frequently analyzed in NLP+CSS that are not. Each is pre-sented alongside an example in the context of po-lice reform. Table 1 is not exhaustive in several re-spects. First, the definitions provided do not reflect the full range of how these concepts have been theo-rized. Some argue, for instance, that values and atti-tudes are specific forms of beliefs (Kalmoe, 2020). Second, narrower subtypes, like stereotypes (be-liefs about individuals who hold particular social identities) and prejudices (attitudes toward such individuals) (Correll et al., 2010) are not listed. Third, Table 1 does not capture all constructs that have been associated with ideology, such as cogni-tive heuristics (Ray, 2019) or emotions (Maio et al., 2006), nor all constructs separate from ideology but relevant in NLP+CSS, such as dialect (Hofmann et al., 2024) or personality (Jost et al., 2009). While thus not exhaustive, Table 1 does capture the four concepts most often assumed to consti-tute ideology: values, attitudes, beliefs and their rationalizations. As Figure 1 suggests, these can be arranged into a partial hierarchy, where as one moves downward concepts become (1) fewer, (2) increasingly abstract, and (3) more prescriptive in nature (Maio et al., 2006; Oliver and Johnston, 2000; Van Dijk, 1998). This hierarchy also high-lights important existential dependencies: attitudes must be supported by beliefs (Maio et al., 2006), and beliefs must be grounded in rationalizations (Williams, 2022). Finally, the hierarchy empha-sizes the importance of values, which manifest in both conscious and subconscious ways that are crit-ical in guiding ideological thought and behavior. Table 1 also lists three concepts often examined in NLP+CSS that ideologies do not consist of: so-cial identity, expressed issue stance, and frames. As implied in Figure 1, ideologies interact with identity-driven and framing processes to produce discourse, where stances on issues are expressed. Expressed issue stances are thus discursive behav-Concept Definition Example Ideological Concepts       

> Value [A]bstract ideals (e.g., freedom) or building blocks that guide con-duct in daily life (Maio et al., 2006) and “that [are a] glue [that binds] together many more specific attitudes and beliefs’ (Converse, 1964, pg.211).” (Vishwanath, 2025, pg.2) Freedom Attitude “Tendencies to evaluate an object positively or negatively” (pg. 283) that are a function of a set of object-relevant beliefs and emotions (Maio et al., 2006) We should change how policing and pun-ishment work. Belief A determination about the truth of a statement (Vlasceanu et al., 2024, pg. 445) or proposition (Van Dijk, 1998) The criminal justice system dispropor-tionately targets people of color. Rationalization [R]easons that justify the truth of the relevant beliefs (Williams, 2022, pg. 7) Black people are less likely to be re-leased on bail, which affects sentencing.
> Separate Dimensions of Analysis
> Expressed Issue Stance Stated preferences over a governmental policy A tweet saying “I support police reform” Social Iden-tity An often-named social position, role, group membership, or category that can be used to understand groups of individuals Republican Frame The result of a framing process that “select[s] some aspects of a perceived reality and make them more salient in a communicating text." (Entman, 1993), cf (Card et al., 2015) The use of social justice-oriented lan-guage to justify police reform

Table 1: Concepts often discussed in the context of ideology, separated between those that are elements of ideology and those that should not. 

iors , not direct manifestations of ideological con-cepts. Interpretation of expressed stance in dis-course must therefore account for mediating pro-cesses, a claim that is true even in structured con-texts like surveys (Green et al., 2020; Malka and Adelman, 2023). Frames are not components of ideologies be-cause framing is the act of selecting and empha-sizing particular aspects of a situation or issue, while ideology refers to the underlying system of meaning being communicated (Oliver and John-ston, 2000). Not all NLP+CSS scholars see such a clean separation between frames and ideology. Drawing on Sullivan (2023), Otmakhova et al. (2024) identify three types of framing: semantic frames , semantics constraints such as those defined in FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), communicative frames , defined by discursive choices such as which words to use, and cognitive frames , which define the cognitive structures that are activated to inter-pret discourse. Cognitive frames are closest to ideology, but should still be understood as separate. Cognitive frames activated by, e.g., a newspaper headline, will include content from multiple ideolo-gies, as well as non-ideological content. Separating frames from ideology allows us to ask questions like, what set of ideologies are embedded in the cognitive frames that are typically induced by a communicative content (Van Dijk, 1998)? Social identities often exist in concert with spe-cific ideologies or even specific ideological com-ponents (e.g. sacred value theory, Atran and Axel-rod, 2008; Tetlock, 2003). But identities are who we (think or subconsciously feel we) are, and ide-ologies are what we (think we should or are sub-consciously are motivated to) believe. Separating identity and ideology is therefore useful in settings where ideologies are pervasive and we are inter-ested in exploring their relationship to different identities, as is the case with, e.g., racial ideology and the study of organizations (Ray, 2019). Fur-ther, identities can also be non-ideological; as Ma-son (2018) says, “identity does not require values and policy attitudes.” Keeping identity analytically distinct thus allows researchers to investigate how identity and ideology co-produce attitudes and be-havior, rather than assuming identity is itself inher-ently ideological (Kalmoe, 2020). 

2.2 How should we model relationships between concepts? 

Our framework specifies two types of relation-ships between ideological concepts: entailment and 

composition . Entailment relationships are implica-tions, such as “if this belief is true, then that belief must also be true.” Entailment relationships are thus socially-shared cognitive associations, where a view on one concept is expected to bring to mind a view on another. Composition relationships, in contrast, exist where one concept is a necessary component of another. For example, rationaliza-tions are required for a belief to exist (Williams, 2022). These relationships should be familiar to NLP+CSS scholars. Entailment is a core NLP task, and the entailment/composition distinction reflects the distinction between semantic associations and (taxonomic) semantic similarity (Resnik, 1999). Most empirical research on ideology focuses on entailment. More specifically, most work identifies entailmnt links between concepts using population-level pairwise statistics (e.g. the correlation be-tween attitude responses in surveys) (Converse, 1964; Fishman and Davis, 2022). These relation-ships are, on their surface, tautological—if ideolo-gies are socially shared, then concepts within the same ideology should be correlated within popu-lations. But, as we emphasize in Section 2.3 be-low, individuals do not always hold or express all parts of ideologies equally, and in any case hold many ideologies that overlap only on a subset of concepts (Van Dijk, 1998). Ideology researchers therefore do expect some of these relationships to be stronger or more important than others, and further anticipate that this structure is important in understanding individuals’ ideological sophis-tication (Converse, 1964). While less popular in ideology theory, hierarchical structure induced by composite relationships is widely understood to ex-ist (Peffley and Hurwitz, 1985), especially in work with a more psychological bent (Maio et al., 2006). Ideologies, then, “are perhaps best understood to have both hierarchical and more horizontal struc-ture” (Homer-Dixon et al., 2013). This relational structure means that ideologies can be formalized as a multi-level network struc-ture. Entailment relationships may exist within levels, and both entailment and composition rela-tionships may exist across levels. Beliefs, ratio-nalizations and composition relationships are best thought of as binary —an ideology either has them or it does not. However, as portrayed in Figure 1, our framework defines ideologies most specifically as attributed multi-level sub networks. They are at-tributed because both nodes and edges can have at-tributes. Values are continuous —ideologies likely contain most or all values, but to differing mag-nitudes (Van Dijk, 1998). And attitudes and en-tailment relationships are valenced —they can be positive or negative. Ideologies are subnetworks because ideologies are subsets of nodes and rela-tions in a much larger space of concepts and their interconnections. Although such attributed multi-level network models have been widely explored in psychology (Dalege et al., 2024; Vlasceanu et al., 2024; Free-man and Ambady, 2011), and ideology scholars broadly understand them to exist, attributed multi-level models of ideology remain almost entirely underexplored empirically. However, clear chal-lenges exist in, for example, how to best model competing ideologies. This therefore represents an exciting space for methodological innovation in NLP+CSS. 

2.3 What counts as a coherent ideology? 

Our framework defines four types of coherence an ideology should satisfy: subject matter coher-ence, temporal coherence, social coherence, and 

conceptual coherence. 4

Subject matter coherence Ideologies only ex-ist around particular domains of social life where there is a struggle for power (Van Dijk, 1998). NLP researchers should take care when defining their domain and use it as a scope condition for analysis. For example, researchers studying political ideolo-gies should be explicit about what they view as “political” and understand the underlying assump-tions (Görtz et al., 2023; Lane et al., 2022). 

Temporal coherence Ideologies may change over time, but they have a core set of concepts and relations that are temporally persistent and stable (Van Dijk, 1998). The idea of temporal coherence in general is familiar to NLP researchers, who have long made similar assumptions about how mean-ings (Hamilton et al., 2016) and topics (Blei and Lafferty, 2006) change over time. However, one additional challenge to measuring temporal persis-tence in ideologies is that temporal stability is tied to measurement quality (Ansolabehere et al., 2008; Fishman and Davis, 2022). By abstracting a con-cept to be more general, e.g. by aiming to measure an attitude and not its composite beliefs, we can expect to find more signals in discourse. However, 

> 4Our treatment of coherence differs from the canonical work of Gerring (1997) (while maintaining consistency with his definition of ideology). Gerring (1997) defines coherence only in the way we will refer to conceptual coherence, while elsewhere acknowledging the importance of temporal stability, subject matter coherence, and shared-ness that we look at. Here, we broaden the meaning of coherence to emphasize that all of these can be understood technically as assumptions (or constraints) that can inform learning of ideological structure from discourse.

such abstraction then dampens our ability to model ideological complexity. This link from measure-ment to abstraction is also conflated with the hierar-chical nature of ideological systems. For example, values are more stable than attitudes (Vishwanath, 2025), but in part this may simply be because they are more general. This tension between measure-ment quality, ideological hierarchy and complexity, and temporal stability highlights interesting ways to connect existing NLP tasks, e.g. stance detection and value identification, and shows why improv-ing measurement in these tasks will help us better understand the complexity of ideological thought. 

Partial Social coherence Ideologies are 1) so-cially shared (Jost et al., 2009), 2) but not by every-one, and 3) imperfectly, because individuals have their own interpretations of ideologies that do not neatly align (Converse, 1964; Van Dijk, 1998). It is worthwhile to step through each of these points individually. First, ideologies must be understood as socially shared, because they are collectively constructed through discourse (Leader Maynard and Benesch, 2016) and are strategically manipu-lated in discourse by political actors (Green, 2024). Moreover, it is in any case what people under-stand that their ideological positions should be —i.e. ideological norms —that most impact behav-ior (Groenendyk et al., 2023). Second, ideologies are not universally shared because they operate in spaces where power is contested between groups (Van Dijk, 1998). Ideologies can therefore be dis-tinguished from both culture and commonsense in that the latter two are shared meanings that al-low interaction across groups , whereas ideologies are leveraged by groups to compete for and/or ra-tionalize power (Van Dijk, 1998). Finally, while coherent ideologies emerge at scale, there are clear empirical (Brandt and Morgan, 2022) and theoreti-cal (Van Dijk, 1998) differences across individuals in their understandings of ideologies. This idea of patterns in social constructs that are inconsistent in small samples but that emerge at scale should, again, be familiar to NLP+CSS researchers, who have long understood the localized (Zhou et al., 2025) and probabilistic (Hovy et al., 2013) nature of measuring social constructs like ideology. 

Conceptual coherence Concepts within an ide-ology should be structurally and logically coher-ent. By structurally coherent, we mean that con-cepts should have more and/or stronger relations to other concepts within the ideology than to con-cepts outside of it. Prior work on ideology has examined its network structure from multiple an-gles: identifying central concepts within ideologies (Crawford and Weible, 2024; Boutyline and Vaisey, 2017; Warncke, 2025; Brandt and Sleegers, 2021; Fishman and Davis, 2022), testing whether sub-populations exhibit certain levels of conceptual co-herence, 5 and qualitatively identifying ideological structure from discourse where all text is assumed to align with a single ideology (Homer-Dixon et al., 2013; Levine, 2024). However, virtually no work in this space has explored the task of being given a text corpus and then discovering whether zero or more coherent ideologies are expressed within it . This represents a new and exciting space for empirical work, and one where NLP methods sug-gest various possible approaches. We return to this point in Section 4. By logical coherence, we mean that concepts and their relations should satisfy ba-sic building blocks of the network. 6 In particular, it would be unreasonable for an ideology to contain a negative entailment relationship between two posi-tively valanced attitudes. Such forms of logical co-hesion can be useful in situations where competing ideologies share concepts but differ on attributes (e.g. valences) assigned to those attributes. 

2.4 When does a discursive actor adhere to an ideology? 

As Figure 1 insinuates, ideology manifests discur-sively in bits and pieces, through context-specific and strategic expressions from many discursive ac-tors. These ideologically-laden expressions are also shaped by the ways that actors identify them-selves, frame their message, and have interpreted the ideology (Van Dijk, 1998). This all leads to two intertwined complications in determining when ac-tors align with an ideology given their discourse. The first is familiar to NLP+CSS scholars: when does what an actor says reflect adherence to a partic-ular ideology or ideological concept or relation? As highlighted above, many of the ways in which ide-ology is expressed in discourse are already known to the NLP community (e.g. in the ways we mea-sure stance (Burnham, 2025), value orientations (Huang et al., 2025), entailment (Huang and Yang, 

> 5This has been a central question in American political science for sixty years (Converse, 1964), focusing on whether (and how many Kalmoe, 2020) Americans hold coherent lib-eral or conservative ideologies.
> 6This is different from assuming that ideologies should be logical in the sense that they reflect the world as it truly is. Many ideologies do not.

2023), etc.). However, there are additional opportu-nities to study discursive strategies for ideological expression, because such expressions are nuanced and do not always manifest as, e.g., expressions of issue stance. Indeed, Van Dijk (2013) lays out vari-ous specific syntactic and semantic structures that can be expressive of ideology that are not neatly aligned to existing NLP+CSS tasks, such as us vs. them language and linguistic accommodation. Integration of these signals with, e.g., stance de-tection suggests a fruitful avenue of work. In ana-lyzing such signals, however, NLP+CSS scholars must contend with the fact that actors are both con-sciously and subconsciously motivated to express a mixture of what they believe, what they know they should believe, and what they think others believe. As with culture (Zhou et al., 2025), it is critical that we think separately about each. Fi-nally, while a premise of our framework is that ideologies are distinct from frames and identities, this does not mean that we should ignore empiri-cal links between discursive strategies that overlap across identities, framing choices, and ideological concepts. We should instead leverage these rela-tionships to help us co-construct our understanding of frames, identities, and ideologies together. This connects to a second challenge: given a set of actors and their associations with ideologies, ideological concepts, identities, and frames, when do we say an individual “has” an ideology, when we may not even know which ideologies exist? This is a form of the well-known dual problem in sociology (Breiger, 1974; Morgan, 2018), and em-phasizes that in our framework, there is no free lunch: we either must assume various forms of coherence, or accept that we can capture only frag-ments of ideological thought in socio-temporally situated data. As we expand on next, our frame-work thus emphasizes new forms of uncertainty that must be considered and explicitly addressed, either empirically or theoretically, if we wish to most effectively study ideology in discourse. 

## 3 Steps Towards Operationalization 

We illustrate how the proposed framework can be operationalized in practice. We separate two tasks: (1) extracting (noisy) concepts and relations from discourse, and (2) inferring ideological structure from these observations. The first is an NLP prob-lem that yields partial observations of an attributed, multi-level network; the second is a modeling prob-lem over those observations. A central challenge is that multiple ideologies coexist and conflict, differing in concept valence and relational structure. To address this, we can model ideologies not as clusters in a single net-work, but as separate draws from a distribution over attributed multi-level networks . Actors can then be modeled as distributions over ideologies, and texts as samples conditioned on those distri-butions. Under this formulation, inference (e.g., via iterative procedures) reduces to reconstructing ideological networks from partial and noisy ob-servations. This connects naturally to statistical network models (e.g. Sweet et al., 2013; Slaugh-ter and Koehly, 2016) and graph learning in NLP (Pacheco and Goldwasser, 2021). We must then map discourse to valenced con-cepts and relations. A simple baseline defines a concept set (e.g., via grounded theory) and applies existing NLP models to extract concepts and their relationships. As noted above, however, a number of interesting extensions might exist as we con-sider other ways of signifying ideological position-ing (Van Dijk, 2023). Additionally, as ideological structure is learned, models can be refined, e.g. via distant supervision to improve detection of sparsely labeled concepts. Both network inference and concept (relation) extraction should be grounded in social theory. With respect to the former, theory can define can-didate ideologies and their core components. For example, in racial discourse, we could define two known and competing ideologies, color-blindness and intersectionality. Each can be associated with core concepts (e.g., abstract liberalism or minimiza-tion of racism for color-blindness (Bonilla-Silva, 2006)). Positive entailment relationships between concepts within an ideology could then be assumed to exist (because we know they are part of the same ideology), and negative entailment relationships between concepts could be assumed for concepts in competing ideologies. With respect to the latter, these same theories also serve as their own use-ful starting points for distance supervision of NLP models for identifying ideological expressions in discourse. For example, color-blind theory helps us to see the first example tweet at the beginning of this article as an example of both a belief in abstract liberalism, and the second example tweet as one that believes in the existence of structural racism. And across both network inference and concept (relation) extraction, theory informs assumptions about coherence. It can help us to determine just how slowly ideologies can change (temporal coher-ence), just how likely it is that socially connected actors share ideological positions in a given context (social coherence), and/or how strongly an ideology is tied to specific concepts or relations (conceptual coherence). Finally, theory can also tie specific identities or frames to specific ideologies, giving additional strength to these metadata in shaping the space of possible ideological constellations. These theoret-ical assumptions and coherence measures can in this way serve as priors, or analogously, as con-straints/regularizers, in different components of the model. We thus can develop conceptual models of ideol-ogy through a careful and explicit combination of social theory and data-informed modeling. Mod-eling coherence as constraints (e.g. hierarchically, Liu et al., 2024), bringing additional context to short-form texts (Pujari et al., 2023), incorporating meta-data (Roy and Goldwasser, 2020), and adding elements to account for other discursive strategies that express ideology (Van Dijk, 2022), one can build a model that probabilistically allows for addi-tional concepts to be associated with each of these ideologies, and for new ideologies to emerge. 

## 4 Some Implications for NLP+CSS 

Having outlined our framework, we use this section to touch on three concrete ways that the conceptual study of ideology can advance work in NLP+CSS, and vice versa. 

4.1 Enriching work on ideology detection 

Existing work in NLP+CSS on ideology detec-tion shares a common set of modeling assumptions about what ideologies are and how they relate to discourse: ideologies are positions in a latent (dis-crete or continuous) space, and ideological com-mitments of actors and issue positions are defined as a position in that space. Ideology detection the task of taking discourse (and metadata) and using it to place actors and issues into that space. Our framework reinterprets and broadens this task. Rather than treating ideologies as fixed in advance, ideologies are time-varying and socially-shared networks of concepts whose existence, con-tents, and boundaries may themselves be objects of empirical inquiry. Under this view, ideology detec-tion is no longer a task of locating texts, issues, or actors within a predefined ideological space, but of identifying which ideological systems are present in a corpus, how they are internally orga-nized, and how they are expressed in discourse in relation to identity-driven and framing processes. More specifically, our framework foregrounds si-multaneous uncertainty over (1) whether a given ideology exists as a coherent system rather than an analyst-imposed category, (2) which concepts and relations constitute that ideology in a given socio-temporal context, and (3) whether particular discursive expressions reflect ideological commit-ment as opposed to other processes such as identity performance or framing. One argument against broadening ideology de-tection in this way is that it ignores the importance of existing dimensional models that explain consid-erable variation in behavior (Jost et al., 2009) and that have a long history in our field (Laver et al., 2003; Barberá and Sood, 2016; Iyyer et al., 2014). Our goal in doing so is not to quibble over the utility of a left/right ideological spectrum in certain con-texts, the evidence for this is overwhelming (Jost et al., 2009). In particular, if one is interested in using ideology as a dependent variable in a highly generalizable way in the United States, then it is unlikely one can improve on the left/right model of ideology. However, the left/right spectrum does fail to ex-plain attitudes in a substantial portion of the popu-lation, even in America where partisan divides are hyper-salient (Kalmoe, 2020), and unequivocally fails in global context where it is less so (May-nard and Mildenberger, 2018). There are, more-over, normative benefits to deemphasizing the low-dimensional nature of two-party politics (Wang et al., 2021). These two points emphasize at least the need for consideration of a more expansive set of dimensions to understand ideology (Uscinski et al., 2021). To this end, it is worth noting that, given a set of named ideologies and actor positions on them from a conceptual model of ideology, one can construct a dimensional model that is largely consistent with both our framework (dimensions are the named ideologies) and existing models, if those named ideologies correspond to the dimensional theory. For example, the ideologically-relevant component of Moral Foundations Theory (MFT) (Haidt, 2013), widely used in the NLP+CSS literature, is a par-ticular instantiation of our framework where dif-ferences in attention to (moral) value alignments drive differences between two ideological camps across a wide range of domains and we ignore other concept types. Still, we see more value in using these dimen-sional models as starting points for the concep-tual study of ideology, rather than as truisms for which we should build predictive models. Put differently, we see the continued development of LLMs and their capacity to help us rapidly inter-pret data as an opportunity to create new ways of studying ideology that allow for the adaptability of theory to domain and context in new ways through theoretically-informed and data-driven understand-ings of ideology. While this leaves us in a space of arguing for more complexity and nuance in a space where it is sometimes not needed (Healy, 2017), NLP+CSS has faced similar arguments against adding com-plexity and uncertainty to the analysis of other so-cial concepts, like framing (Card et al., 2016; Sap et al., 2020) and culture (DiMaggio et al., 2013; DellaPosta et al., 2015). In each case, the field has responded with novel efforts that have advanced knowledge and measurement capacity. We argue that it is time to do the same for ideology, fac-ing its uncertainties and complexities head on and addressing them with a combination of top-down (i.e. theoretically-informed) and bottom-up (data-informed) approaches. That is, we are not arguing for “a more data driven approach,” but rather one where we refine the form of our modeling assump-tions to those that better reflect genuine ideological complexity. 

4.2 Enabling new links between existing tasks 

As implied, then, we believe that NLP+CSS al-ready has many of the tools needed to study ideo-logical conceptually, but was lacking a framework to do so. For example, stance detection enables inference about attitudes toward specific issues (Al-dayel and Magdy, 2019), and related work on val-ues (Wright et al., 2025; Borenstein et al., 2025; Ren et al., 2024) can capture another components of ideological expression. Our framework shows that these can be understood as complementary measurements of rich and complex ideological sys-tems. Conceptual models of ideology therefore show promise in providing a theoretically grounded way to identify and explore structure emerging across tasks, without oversimplifying this struc-ture to a dimensional model. At the same time, our framework also clarifies what ideology is not ,allowing scholars a new tool to differentiate be-tween, e.g., cultural patterns that emerge globally and allow for shared interpretation versus ideolog-ical ones that emerge in specific domains where competing interpretations are pitted against each other. 

4.3 Helps us to reinterpret and reimagine existing work. 

Finally, thinking conceptually about ideology al-lows us to return to old ideas with new tools, and to reinterpret existing findings with a new perspec-tive. With respect to reviving old ideas, political science has long understood that interviews are a highly effective but unscalable way to identify rich ideological structure (Lane, 1962). Armed with a conceptual understanding of ideology and large lan-guage models (LLMs) that can semi-automate inter-viewing (Wuttke et al., 2025), however, NLP+CSS scholars may be poised to renew this line of work in exciting ways. With respect to reinterpreting findings, we take the example of recent work on measuring the ideological leanings of LLMs (Bernardelle et al., 2025; Fulay et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Rozado, 2024; Kennedy et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2025). Such studies often rely on per-sona prompting or survey-style instruments, and explore how persona-informed LLM responses (do not) correspond to coherent ideological positions on the left/right spectrum. When ideology is in-stead understood as an attributed multi-level net-work of concepts that are not deterministically con-nected to social identities, questions about whether an LLM is “ideological,” and in what way, become more complex. For example, a model may express components of multiple ideologies across domains, raising questions about ideological coherence, com-patibility, and alignment that cannot be resolved through a single scalar score. Similarly, when such complexity is observed, we cannot assume that these models are “not ideological,” but rather must consider the possibility that their ideologi-cal leanings are multiplex (Maynard and Milden-berger, 2018), and/or that they interact in complex ways with normative behaviors driven by identity-informed cognitive processing (Groenendyk et al., 2023). Prior work has emphasized the importance of moving beyond the left/right spectrum, creating comprehensive measures of alignment along many values (Ren et al., 2024), issues (Röttger et al., 2025), or norms (Ziems et al., 2023). But, as in our introductory example, a conceptual model of ideol-ogy provides a middle ground, accepting that we indeed must move beyond studying whether LLMs are biased along familiar spectrums, but also that there is important and complex structure in discur-sive expressions across these many issues, values, and norms that we should be exploring. 

## 5 Limitations and Conclusion 

Our proposed framework is incomplete in a num-ber of ways. We note two of these limitations here. First, we provide no formal mathematical speci-fication of an ideology. While we have tried to make clear what that formalism would entail, work remains to solidify this. Second, we do not exten-sively explore in our discussion about LLMs and ideology the tenuous connections between ideol-ogy measures and actual behavior in these models (Shen et al., 2025). As the centrality of LLMs in our sociotechnical systems increases, this point also warrants further exploration. We hope, however, that despite these and other limitations, our work still makes an effective case for NLP+CSS scholars to consider approaching ideology beyond the dimensional representation. Doing so, we believe, will jointly advance work from both NLP scholars and scholars of ideology, because, as Maynard and Mildenberger (2018) puts it, “[i]f ideologies are principally set apart by their complex and varying conceptual configurations... then their reduction to a spectrum... misses what matters.” 

## References 

Abeer Aldayel and Walid Magdy. 2019. Your Stance is Exposed! Analysing Possible Factors for Stance De-tection on Social Media. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. , 3(CSCW):205:1–205:20. Stephen Ansolabehere, Jonathan Rodden, and James M. Snyder Jr. 2008. The Strength of Issues: Using Multiple Measures to Gauge Preference Stability, Ideological Constraint, and Issue Voting. American Political Science Review , 102(2):215–232. Scott Atran and Robert Axelrod. 2008. Reframing sa-cred values. Negotiation Journal , 24(3):221–246. Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe. 1998. The berkeley framenet project. In COLING 1998 Volume 1: The 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics .Pablo Barberá and Gaurav Sood. 2016. Follow Your Ideology: Measuring Media Ideology on Social Net-works. Pietro Bernardelle, Leon Fröhling, Stefano Civelli, Ric-cardo Lunardi, Kevin Roitero, and Gianluca Demar-tini. 2025. Mapping and Influencing the Political Ideology of Large Language Models using Synthetic Personas. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 , pages 864–867, Sydney NSW Australia. ACM. David M. Blei and John D. Lafferty. 2006. Dynamic topic models. In Proceedings of the 23rd interna-tional conference on Machine learning , pages 113– 120. Eduardo Bonilla-Silva. 2006. Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence of racial in-equality in the United States . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. Nadav Borenstein, Arnav Arora, Lucie-Aimée Kaffee, and Isabelle Augenstein. 2025. Investigating human values in online communities. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1607–1627. Andrei Boutyline and Stephen Vaisey. 2017. Belief Network Analysis: A Relational Approach to Un-derstanding the Structure of Attitudes. American Journal of Sociology , 122(5):1371–1447. Mark J. Brandt and G. Scott Morgan. 2022. Between-person methods provide limited insight about within-person belief systems. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 123:621–635. Place: US. Mark J. Brandt and Willem W. A. Sleegers. 2021. Eval-uating Belief System Networks as a Theory of Politi-cal Belief System Dynamics. Personality and Social Psychology Review , 25(2):159–185. Ronald L. Breiger. 1974. The duality of persons and groups. Social forces , 53(2):181–190. Michael Burnham. 2025. Stance detection: a practical guide to classifying political beliefs in text. Political Science Research and Methods , 13(3):611–628. Dallas Card, Amber E. Boydstun, Justin H. Gross, Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2015. The Me-dia Frames Corpus: Annotations of Frames Across Issues. In ACL (2) , pages 438–444. Dallas Card, Justin Gross, Amber Boydstun, and Noah A. Smith. 2016. Analyzing framing through the casts of characters in the news. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1410–1420. Kai Chen, Zihao He, Jun Yan, Taiwei Shi, and Kristina Lerman. 2024. How Susceptible are Large Language Models to Ideological Manipulation? arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2402.11725 [cs]. Patricia Hill Collins and Sirma Bilge. 2020. Intersec-tionality . John Wiley & Sons. Philip E. Converse. 1964. The nature of belief systems in mass publics. In The nature of belief systems in mass publics , d. e. apter edition, pages 206–261. Free Press, New York, NY, USA. Joshua Correll, Charles M. Judd, Bernadette Park, and Bernd Wittenbrink. 2010. Measuring prejudice, stereotypes and discrimination. The Sage handbook of prejudice, stereotyping and discrimination. Lon-don: SAGE , pages 45–62. Anna M. Crawford and Christopher M. Weible. 2024. The political polarization over abortion: An analysis of advocacy coalition belief systems. Policy Sciences ,57(3):599–620. Jonas Dalege, Mirta Galesic, and Henrik Olsson. 2024. Networks of beliefs: An integrative theory of individual- and social-level belief dynamics. Psy-chological Review .Shannon N. Davis and Theodore N. Greenstein. 2009. Gender Ideology: Components, Predictors, and Con-sequences. Annual Review of Sociology , 35(1):87– 105. Daniel DellaPosta, Yongren Shi, and Michael Macy. 2015. Why Do Liberals Drink Lattes? American Journal of Sociology , 120(5):1473–1511. Arthur T Denzau and Douglass C North. 2000. Shared mental models: Ideologies and institutions. Elements of reason: Cognition, choice, and the bounds of ra-tionality , pages 23–46. Paul DiMaggio, Manish Nag, and David Blei. 2013. Exploiting affinities between topic modeling and the sociological perspective on culture: Application to newspaper coverage of U.S. government arts funding. 

Poetics , 41(6):570–606. Ashley (“Woody”) Doane. 2017. Beyond Color-blindness: (Re) Theorizing Racial Ideology. Socio-logical Perspectives , 60(5):975–991. Robert M. Entman. 1993. Framing: Towards clarifica-tion of a fractured paradigm. McQuail’s reader in mass communication theory , 390:397. Nic Fishman and Nicholas T. Davis. 2022. Change We Can Believe In: Structural and Content Dynamics within Belief Networks. American Journal of Politi-cal Science , 66(3):648–663. Michael Freeden. 2021. Ideology studies: New ad-vances and interpretations . Routledge. Deen Freelon, Charlton D. McIlwain, and Meredith Clark. 2016. Beyond the hashtags:# Ferguson,# Blacklivesmatter, and the online struggle for offline justice. Center for Media & Social Impact, American University, Forthcoming .Jonathan B Freeman and Nalini Ambady. 2011. A dy-namic interactive theory of person construal. Psycho-logical review , 118(2):247. Suyash Fulay, William Brannon, Shrestha Mohanty, Cassandra Overney, Elinor Poole-Dayan, Deb Roy, and Jad Kabbara. 2024. On the Relationship be-tween Truth and Political Bias in Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 9004–9018. ArXiv:2409.05283 [cs]. Ryan J. Gallagher, Andrew J. Reagan, Christopher M. Danforth, and Peter Sheridan Dodds. 2018. Diver-gent discourse between protests and counter-protests: #BlackLivesMatter and #AllLivesMatter. PLOS ONE , 13(4):e0195644. John Gerring. 1997. Ideology: A Definitional Analysis. 

Political Research Quarterly , 50(4):957–994. Jon Green. 2024. The Rhetorical “What Goes with What”: Political Pundits and the Discursive Super-structure of Ideology in US Politics. Public Opinion Quarterly , 88(4):1166–1190. Jon Green, Jon Kingzette, William Minozzi, and Michael Neblo. 2020. A Speech Act Perspective on the Survey Response. Unpublished manuscript .Eric Groenendyk, Erik O. Kimbrough, and Mark Pickup. 2023. How Norms Shape the Nature of Belief Sys-tems in Mass Publics. American Journal of Political Science , 67(3):623–638. Carl Görtz, Carolin V. Zorell, and Jennifer Fitzgerald. 2023. Casting light on citizens’ conceptions of what is ‘political’. Acta Politica , 58(1):57–78. Jonathan Haidt. 2013. The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion . Vintage Books, New York. Amber M. Hamilton, Douglas Hartmann, and Ryan Larson. 2022. Assessing and Extending Colorblind Racism Theory Using National Survey Data. Sociol-ogy of Race and Ethnicity , 8(2):267–283. Publisher: SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. William L. Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Juraf-sky. 2016. Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statistical Laws of Semantic Change. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09096 .Kieran Healy. 2017. Fuck nuance. Sociological Theory ,35(2):118–127. Valentin Hofmann, Pratyusha Ria Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and Sharese King. 2024. AI generates covertly racist decisions about people based on their dialect. Nature ,633(8028):147–154. Thomas Homer-Dixon, Jonathan Leader Maynard, Matto Mildenberger, Manjana Milkoreit, Steven J. Mock, Stephen Quilley, Tobias Schröder, and Paul Thagard. 2013. A complex systems approach to the study of ideology: Cognitive-affective structures and the dynamics of belief systems. Journal of social and political psychology , 1(1). Dirk Hovy, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, Ashish Vaswani, and Eduard Hovy. 2013. Learning Whom to Trust with MACE. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 1120–1130, Atlanta, Georgia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jing Huang and Diyi Yang. 2023. Culturally Aware Natural Language Inference. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 7591–7609, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Saffron Huang, Esin Durmus, Miles McCain, Kunal Handa, Alex Tamkin, Jerry Hong, Michael Stern, Arushi Somani, Xiuruo Zhang, and Deep Ganguli. 2025. Values in the Wild: Discovering and Analyz-ing Values in Real-World Language Model Interac-tions. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2504.15236 [cs]. Mohit Iyyer, Peter Enns, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Philip Resnik. 2014. Political ideology detection using recursive neural networks. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1113–1122. John T. Jost, Christopher M. Federico, and Jaime L. Napier. 2009. Political Ideology: Its Structure, Func-tions, and Elective Affinities. Annual Review of Psy-chology , 60(1):307–337. Nathan P. Kalmoe. 2020. Uses and Abuses of Ideol-ogy in Political Psychology. Political Psychology ,41(4):771–793. Molly Kennedy, Ayyoob Imani, Timo Spinde, and Hin-rich Schütze. 2025. Through the LLM Looking Glass: A Socratic Probing of Donkeys, Elephants, and Markets. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2503.16674 [cs]. Junsol Kim, James Evans, and Aaron Schein. 2025. Linear Representations of Political Perspective Emerge in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2503.02080 [cs]. Kathleen Knight. 2006. Transformations of the Concept of Ideology in the Twentieth Century. The American Political Science Review , 100(4):619–626. Daniel S. Lane, Kevin Do, and Nancy Molina-Rogers. 2022. What is political expression on social media anyway?: A systematic review. Journal of Informa-tion Technology & Politics , 19(3):331–345. _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/19331681.2021.1985031. Robert Edwards Lane. 1962. Political ideology: Why the American common man believes what he does. Michael Laver, Kenneth Benoit, and John Garry. 2003. Extracting policy positions from political texts using words as data. American political science review ,97(2):311–331. Jonathan Leader Maynard and Susan Benesch. 2016. Dangerous speech and dangerous ideology: An inte-grated model for monitoring and prevention. Geno-cide Studies and Prevention , 9(3). Sanguk Lee, Matthew H. Goldberg, Seth A. Rosenthal, Edward W. Maibach, John E. Kotcher, and Anthony Leiserowitz. 2024. Climate change belief systems across political groups in the United States. PLOS ONE , 19(3):e0300048. Peter Levine. 2024. Mapping ideologies as networks of ideas. Journal of Polit-ical Ideologies , 29(3):464–491. _eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/13569317.2022.2138293. Songtao Liu, Bang Wang, Wei Xiang, Han Xu, and Minghua Xu. 2024. Encoding Hierarchical Schema via Concept Flow for Multifaceted Ideology Detec-tion. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics ACL 2024 , pages 2930–2942, Bangkok, Thailand and virtual meeting. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gregory R. Maio, James M. Olson, Mark M. Bernard, and Michelle A. Luke. 2006. Ideologies, Values, Attitudes, and Behavior. In John Delamater, edi-tor, Handbook of Social Psychology , pages 283–308. Springer US. Series Title: Handbooks of Sociology and Social Research. Ariel Malka and Mark Adelman. 2023. Expressive sur-vey responding: A closer look at the evidence and its implications for American democracy. Perspectives on Politics , 21(4):1198–1209. John Levi Martin. 2015. What is ideology? Sociologia, Problemas e Práticas , (77):9–31. Lilliana Mason. 2018. Ideologues without Issues: The Polarizing Consequences of Ideological Identities. 

Public Opinion Quarterly , 82(S1):866–887. Jonathan Leader Maynard. 2013. A map of the field of ideological analysis. Journal of Political Ideologies ,18(3):299–327. Jonathan Leader Maynard and Matto Mildenberger. 2018. Convergence and Divergence in the Study of Ideology: A Critical Review. British Journal of Political Science , 48(2):563–589. Jonathan Howard Morgan. 2018. The Duality of Identi-ties and Groups: The Effects of Status Homophily on Social Interactions and Relations . PhD Thesis, Duke University. Jennifer C. Mueller. 2020. Racial ideology or racial ignorance? An alternative theory of racial cognition. 

Sociological Theory , 38(2):142–169. Pamela Oliver and Hank Johnston. 2000. What a good idea! Ideologies and frames in social movement re-search. Mobilization: An International Quarterly ,5(1):37–54. ISBN: 1086-671X. Lilla V. Orr, Anthony Fowler, and Gregory A. Huber. 2023. Is Affective Polarization Driven by Identity, Loyalty, or Substance? American Journal of Political Science , 67(4):948–962. Yulia Otmakhova, Shima Khanehzar, and Lea Frermann. 2024. Media Framing: A typology and Survey of Computational Approaches Across Disciplines. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15407–15428, Bangkok, Thai-land. Association for Computational Linguistics. Maria Leonor Pacheco and Dan Goldwasser. 2021. Modeling content and context with deep relational learning. Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 9:100–119. Demetris Paschalides, George Pallis, and Marios D. Dikaiakos. 2025. Probing the Subtle Ideological Manipulation of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2504.14287 [cs]. Mark A. Peffley and Jon Hurwitz. 1985. A Hierarchical Model of Attitude Constraint. American Journal of Political Science , 29(4):871–890. David Guzman Piedrahita, Irene Strauss, Bernhard Schölkopf, Rada Mihalcea, and Zhijing Jin. 2025. Democratic or Authoritarian? Probing a New Dimen-sion of Political Biases in Large Language Models. 

arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2506.12758 [cs]. Daniel Preo¸ tiuc-Pietro, Ye Liu, Daniel Hopkins, and Lyle Ungar. 2017. Beyond Binary Labels: Political Ideology Prediction of Twitter Users. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 729–740, Vancouver, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rajkumar Pujari, Chengfei Wu, and Dan Goldwasser. 2023. "We Demand Justice!": Towards Social Con-text Grounding of Political Texts. Raúl Pérez. 2017. Racism without Hatred? Racist Hu-mor and the Myth of “Colorblindness”. Sociological Perspectives , 60(5):956–974. Victor Ray. 2019. A theory of racialized organizations. 

American Sociological Review , 84(1):26–53. Pub-lisher: Sage Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA. Yuanyi Ren, Haoran Ye, Hanjun Fang, Xin Zhang, and Guojie Song. 2024. ValueBench: Towards Compre-hensively Evaluating Value Orientations and Under-standing of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2406.04214 [cs]. Philip Resnik. 1999. Semantic similarity in a taxonomy: An information-based measure and its application to problems of ambiguity in natural language. J. Artif. Intell. Res.(JAIR) , 11:95–130. Shamik Roy and Dan Goldwasser. 2020. Weakly Su-pervised Learning of Nuanced Frames for Analyzing Polarization in News Media. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 7698–7716, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shamik Roy and Dan Goldwasser. 2023. " A Tale of Two Movements": Identifying and Comparing Perspectives in# BlackLivesMatter and# BlueLives-Matter Movements-related Tweets using Weakly Su-pervised Graph-based Structured Prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07155 .David Rozado. 2024. The political preferences of LLMs. PLOS ONE , 19(7):e0306621. Paul Röttger, Musashi Hinck, Valentin Hofmann, Kobi Hackenburg, Valentina Pyatkin, Faeze Brahman, and Dirk Hovy. 2025. IssueBench: Millions of Realistic Prompts for Measuring Issue Bias in LLM Writing Assistance. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2502.08395 [cs]. Paul Röttger, Valentin Hofmann, Valentina Pyatkin, Musashi Hinck, Hannah Rose Kirk, Hinrich Schütze, and Dirk Hovy. 2024. Political Compass or Spin-ning Arrow? Towards More Meaningful Evaluations for Values and Opinions in Large Language Models. 

arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2402.16786 [cs]. Maarten Sap, Saadia Gabriel, Lianhui Qin, Dan Juraf-sky, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Social Bias Frames: Reasoning about Social and Power Implications of Language. arXiv:1911.03891 [cs] .ArXiv: 1911.03891. Hua Shen, Nicholas Clark, and Tanu Mitra. 2025. Mind the Value-Action Gap: Do LLMs Act in Alignment with Their Values? In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3097–3118, Suzhou, China. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Sarah Shugars, Adina Gitomer, Stefan McCabe, Ryan J. Gallagher, Kenneth Joseph, Nir Grinberg, Larissa Doroshenko, Brooke Foucault Welles, and David Lazer. 2021. Pandemics, Protests, and Publics: De-mographic Activity and Engagement on Twitter in 2020. Journal of Quantitative Description: Digital Media , 1. Barea Sinno, Bernardo Oviedo, Katherine Atwell, Mal-ihe Alikhani, and Junyi Jessy Li. 2022. Political Ideology and Polarization: A Multi-dimensional Ap-proach. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , pages 231–243, Seattle, United States. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Andrew J. Slaughter and Laura M. Koehly. 2016. Mul-tilevel models for social networks: Hierarchical Bayesian approaches to exponential random graph modeling. Social Networks , 44:334–345. Karen Sullivan. 2023. Three levels of framing. WIREs Cognitive Science , 14(5):e1651. Tracy M. Sweet, Andrew C. Thomas, and Brian W. Junker. 2013. Hierarchical Network Models for Ed-ucation Research: Hierarchical Latent Space Mod-els. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics ,38(3):295–318. Philip E. Tetlock. 2003. Thinking the unthinkable: Sa-cred values and taboo cognitions. Trends in cognitive sciences , 7(7):320–324. Joseph E. Uscinski, Adam M. Enders, Michelle I. Seelig, Casey A. Klofstad, John R. Funchion, Caleb Everett, Stefan Wuchty, Kamal Premaratne, and Manohar N. Murthi. 2021. American Politics in Two Dimensions: Partisan and Ideological Identities versus Anti-Establishment Orientations. American Journal of Political Science , 65(4):877–895. _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/ajps.12616. Teun A. Van Dijk. 1998. Ideology: A multidisciplinary approach. Teun A. Van Dijk. 2013. Ideology and discourse anal-ysis. In The meaning of ideology , pages 110–135. Routledge. Teun A. Van Dijk. 2022. Ideology in cognition and discourse. Mapping ideology in discourse studies ,pages 137–156. Teun A Van Dijk. 2023. Analyzing frame analysis: A critical review of framing studies in social movement research. Discourse Studies , 25(2):153–178. Arjun Vishwanath. 2025. The Impact of Values on Issue Stances: Evidence from Panel Studies. British Journal of Political Science , 55:e50. Madalina Vlasceanu, Ari M. Dyckovsky, and Alin Co-man. 2024. A Network Approach to Investigate the Dynamics of Individual and Collective Beliefs: Ad-vances and Applications of the BENDING Model. 

Perspectives on Psychological Science , 19(2):444– 453. Samuel S.-H. Wang, Jonathan Cervas, Bernard Grof-man, and Keena Lipsitz. 2021. A systems frame-work for remedying dysfunction in US democracy. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,118(50):e2102154118. Philip Warncke. 2025. What Explains Country-Level Differences in Political Belief System Coherence? 

Political Behavior .Daniel Williams. 2022. The marketplace of rationaliza-tions. Economics & Philosophy , pages 1–25. Kathryn A. Woolard. 2020. Language Ideology. In James Stanlaw, editor, The International Encyclope-dia of Linguistic Anthropology , 1 edition, pages 1–21. Wiley. Dustin Wright, Arnav Arora, Nadav Borenstein, Sr-ishti Yadav, Serge Belongie, and Isabelle Augenstein. 2025. Revealing Fine-Grained Values and Opin-ions in Large Language Models. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2406.19238 [cs]. Alexander Wuttke, Matthias Aßenmacher, Christopher Klamm, Max Lang, and Fraue Kreuter. 2025. AI conversational interviewing: Transforming surveys with LLMs as adaptive interviewers. In Proceed-ings of the 9th Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Com-putational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature (LaTeCH-CLfL 2025) , pages 179–204. Victoria Yantseva. 2025. Climate change denial and ide-ology in Swedish online media: measuring ideology change using a computational approach. Journal of Computational Social Science , 8(1):14. Naitian Zhou, David Bamman, and Isaac L. Bleaman. 2025. Culture is Not Trivia: Sociocultural Theory for Cultural NLP. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2502.12057 [cs]. Caleb Ziems, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yi-Chia Wang, Alon Halevy, and Diyi Yang. 2023. NormBank: A Knowl-edge Bank of Situational Social Norms. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2305.17008. Caleb Ziems and Diyi Yang. 2021. To Protect and To Serve? Analyzing Entity-Centric Framing of Police Violence. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 957–976, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Leor Zmigrod. 2022. A Psychology of Ideology: Un-packing the Psychological Structure of Ideological Thinking. Perspectives on Psychological Science ,17(4):1072–1092. 

## A Additional Definitions 

Table 2 presents a few representative definitions of ideology for those who are less familiar with this area of research. Reference Discipline Quote 

(Leader Maynard and Benesch, 2016) Ideology Studies A distinctive system of normative and/or purportedly factual ideas , typically shared 

by members of groups or societies, which underpins individuals’ understanding 

of their political world and guides their political behaviour. 

(Jost et al., 2009) Social Psychology A set of beliefs about the proper order of society and how it can be achieved 

[or similarly] “the shared framework of mental models that groups of individuals possess that provide both an interpretation of the environment and a prescription 

as to how that environment should be structured” (Denzau and North, 2000)...[that is] represented in memory as a kind of schema, i.e. a learned knowledge structure consisting of an interrelated network of beliefs, opinions, and values (Oliver and John-ston, 2000) Sociology The concept of ideology focuses on ideas , on their systematic relations to each other , and on their implications for social and political action based on value commitments...Wilson develops the very useful trichotomy of the structural ele-ments of ideology which Snow and Benford adopted: diagnosis (how things got to be how they are), prognosis (which should be done and what the consequences will be), and rationale (who should do it and why)...an ideology links a theory about society with a cluster of values about what is right and wrong as well as norms about what to do .

Table 2: Selected Definitions and Conceptualizations of Ideology